# Summary

Introduce crate `crossbeam-deque` with an implementation of the Chase-Lev deque.

# Motivation

Work-stealing deque is a common building block in schedulers, for example in
[Rayon](https://github.com/nikomatsakis/rayon/) and
[futures-pool](https://github.com/carllerche/futures-pool).
Currently, these crates are using the deque from [Coco](https://github.com/stjepang/coco),
which is an experimental crate that will soon be deprecated in favor of Crossbeam.

`crossbeam-deque` will use the new Crossbeam's epoch-based garbage collector.

# Detailed design

The basis for implementation is the deque from Coco that already had a good run in
Rayon and consequently in Stylo. However, there will be a few differences:

1. Memory management is done using `crossbeam-epoch`.
2. The `Worker`/`Stealer` interface is redesigned as `Deque`/`Stealer`.
3. Several new convenience methods are introduced.

Other than that, the crucial (and the most tricky to implement) methods like
`push`, `pop`, and `steal` do not depart from the original implementation
(except for the changes associated with porting it to Crossbeam's new epoch-based GC).

## The interface

```rust
/// The "worker" side of the deque.
pub struct Deque<T>;

unsafe impl<T: Send> Send for Deque<T> {}

impl<T> Deque<T> {
    /// Creates a new deque.
    pub fn new() -> Deque<T>;

    /// Creates a new deque with specified minimum capacity.
    pub fn with_min_capacity(min_cap: usize) -> Deque<T>;

    /// Returns `true` if the deque is empty.
    pub fn is_empty(&self) -> bool;

    /// Returns the number of elements in the deque.
    pub fn len(&self) -> usize;

    /// Pushes an element onto the bottom of the deque.
    pub fn push(&self, value: T);

    /// Pops an element from the bottom of the deque.
    pub fn pop(&self) -> Option<T>;

    /// Steals an element from the top of the deque.
    pub fn steal(&self) -> Steal<T>;

    /// Creates a new stealer for the deque.
    pub fn stealer(&self) -> Stealer<T>;
}

/// The "stealer" side of the deque.
pub struct Stealer<T>;

unsafe impl<T: Send> Send for Stealer<T> {}
unsafe impl<T: Send> Sync for Stealer<T> {}

impl<T> Stealer<T> {
    /// Returns `true` if the deque is empty.
    pub fn is_empty(&self) -> bool;

    /// Returns the number of elements in the deque.
    pub fn len(&self) -> usize;

    /// Steals an element from the top of the deque.
    pub fn steal(&self) -> Steal<T>;
}

impl<T> Clone for Stealer<T> { ... }

/// Possible outcomes of a steal operation.
pub enum Steal<T> {
    /// The deque was empty.
    Empty,
    /// Some data was stolen.
    Data(T),
    /// Inconsistent state was encountered. Try again.
    Inconsistent,
}
```

An interesting difference from Coco's API is that a deque is now
constructed using `Deque::new()` rather than using a global function returning
a `(Worker<T>, Stealer<T>)` pair.
Also, there are two ways of creating multiple stealers: you can either create each of them
with `Deque::stealer` or by clone an existing one - whatever works best for you.

Another addition is the `with_min_capacity` constructor. Deques dynamically grow and
shrink as elements are inserted and removed. By specifying a large minimum capacity
it is possible to reduce the frequency of reallocations.

The `steal` method returns a `Steal<T>`. Instead of retrying on a failed CAS operation, the
method returns immediately with `Steal::Inconsistent`. This gives schedulers
fine control over what to do in case of contention.

There is an open [pull request](https://github.com/crossbeam-rs/crossbeam-deque/pull/1)
implemented according to this RFC.

# Drawbacks

None.

# Alternatives

Ultimately, hazard pointers would probably be a better fit for the deque than
epoch-based garbage collection.

In theory, epoch-based GC may leak memory indefinitely if a pinned thread is preempted,
while hazard pointers give stricter guarantees. HP-based GC guarantees that there
is always a bounded number of still-unreclaimed garbage objects.
On the other hand, the advantage of epoch-based GC is that it allows fast
traversal through linked data structures. The Chase-Lev deque isn't a linked data
structure, so here we don't gain anything by choosing epoch-based GC over HP-based GC.

Moreover, HP-based GC would allow us to force perfectly eager destruction of
buffers: just like `Arc`, but without the overhead of contended reference counting.
The idea is that when a thread wants to destroy a buffer, it would check
all hazard pointers to see if it is still used. If there is a thread using it,
we'd CAS the hazard pointer using the buffer and set it to null. When that thread
notices that someone has set its hazard pointer to null, it would take over the
responsibility of destroying the buffer. Then it would check all hazard pointers to see if
anyone is still using it and continue in the same vein.

At some point in the future, we should definitely experiment with HP-based
garbage collection.

# Unresolved questions

When building `futures-pool`, **[@carllerche](https://github.com/carllerche)**
wanted a few additional methods:

1. [A method that steals more than one value at a time.](https://github.com/stjepang/coco/issues/11#issuecomment-339785208)
2. [A `steal_when_greater` method.](https://github.com/stjepang/coco/issues/10#issuecomment-339785563)

While the lack of those is not a deal-breaker, it would still be nice to have them.

At the moment, I'd probably prefer to push forward with the current minimal design,
and then later on discuss how exactly these methods would work, possibly after (if?)
we switch to HP-based GC.

All that said, suggestions are always welcome.
