# Summary

This RFC proposes a Crossbeam roadmap for the near future. It lays out a
vision for where the project should be within the next 3 to 6 months, and where
it should be headed after that.

Crossbeam should first focus on building a strong GC and a small set of
fully-featured data structures: work-stealing deque and MPMC channels.
The focus is on delivering the most useful data structures as soon as possible.
The plan is deliberately not overly ambitious.

After that Crossbeam will explore maps, radix trees, linked lists, stacks,
broadcast channels, and more.

# Motivation

Crossbeam aims to build a set of various data structures and utilities focused
on concurrency and parallelism. Since it's inception, the project has raised
very intriguing ideas ("lock-freedom without garbage collection") and received
plenty of positive publicity. But development has mostly stalled, and we need
a clear plan on how to move forward.

At the moment, we have several data structures that lack in performance,
have constraining APIs, leak memory, or have other problems. These problems
will be fixed and in several months Crossbeam will deliver a small set of data
structures that feel solid, polished and complete.

# Detailed design

The overall roadmap is split into several milestones that will be
achieved, most likely one after another in the described order.

### First milestone: Garbage collector

The core of Crossbeam is it's epoch-based GC, playing an important role in
supporting all concurrent data structures. At the moment, it is inadequate in
several aspects:

1. It does not support destructors.
2. It is not incremental, and may induce long pauses.
3. A lot of garbage can get stuck inside a thread's thread-local bag.
4. It is too lazy - e.g. it practically never frees garbage created by deques.
5. It's `Atomic` API is unsound.

None of these problems are easy to solve, and they will require careful thought.
Since everything else depends on this, improving the GC has the highest priority.

It doesn't have to be perfect immediately, but we'll try to solve all of the
problems now and discuss potential problems that might come up in the future.

More detailed design will be discussed in a separate RFC.

Time estimate: 1 month

### Second milestone: Deque

The current deque is prohibitively slow for Rayon's use case. Another big
issue is that garbage collection is too lazy (a thread-local bag needs to
get filled with at least 32 deque buffers until any garbage gets freed).

Performance can be relatively easily improved, but the buffer reclamation issue
is blocked on GC revamp.

More detailed design will be discussed in a separate RFC.

Time estimate: 1 week

### Third milestone: Channels

Many Rust users ask for MPMC channels. Crossbeam's `MsQueue` and `SegQueue`
provide very simplistic APIs and don't look like traditional channels.
Alternatives like [chan](https://github.com/BurntSushi/chan)
are slow and not very scalable. There are a few other crates that either offer
barebones APIs or lack in performance.

Crossbeam could offer a (lock-free or almost lock-free) MPMC channel that
supports bounded and unbounded variants, channel-like and queue-like APIs,
blocking/non-blocking/timeout variants of recv/send methods, and a `select!` macro.

The basis for bounded MPMC channels is
[this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yIAYmbvL3JxOKOjuCyon7JhW4cSv1wy5hC0ApeGMV9s/pub).
Unbounded channels may be implemented by simply adapting the overall design
to the Michael-Scott queue.

Such a fully-featured MPMC channel will be a great asset to Rust's CSP-style
concurrency story.

More detailed design will be discussed in a separate RFC.

Time estimate: 1 month

### Fourth milestone: Tests

Experience tells that lock-free code which isn't carefully stress-tested is
likely to contain bugs. All (or at least almost all) code in Crossbeam must
be able to pass stress tests when using thread sanitizer.

Apart from extensive correctness tests, benchmarks are needed in order to
make informed decisions on optimization, as well as to measure incremental
improvements and regressions.

Time estimate: 1 month

### Longer-term roadmap

There's a wide range of possibilities for the future. Here are some of the
eaiser challenges:

* Treiber stack. This is a rarely used data structure, but very easy to implement.
* Linked list. It's a handy data structure to have.
* Broadcast channel. There are several crates that provide such functionality.
  We should study them, explore how to extend them, and perhaps integrate
  into Crossbeam.
* Concurrent vector.

And here are more difficult challenges:

* Basic ordered maps. Skiplists are probably the eaisest. Concurrent B-trees
  would also be nice to have. A discussion on tradeoffs and interfaces is
  needed.
* Unordered maps (hash maps). This is a wide area under research, with a lot of
  published papers and different designs.
* Radix trees. They can often be used as an alternative to hash maps. They
  promise vastly better performance than skiplists and B-trees, and even
  allow ordered traversal.

There are several other, not exactly data structures, but more broadly
techniques that could be explored:

* Flat combining.
* Elimination backoff.
* Scalable counters and other kinds of aggregators.
* Hazard pointers.
* Atomic RC-based garbage collection.
* Locks that allow a single writer only, but don't block readers.
* Concurrent bit set.

This is not an extensive list. There are surely other topics to explore, too.

### A note on subprojects

Crossbeam contains a bunch of mostly independent components:
GC, data structures, scoped threads.
It might make sense to split the crate into multiple crates, but it is still
unclear what would be the best way to do that, if at all. This can be decided
in the future.

In any case, Crossbeam's main crate should feel solid, stable, and complete.
Starting new (perhaps experimental) subprojects under the `crossbeam-rs`
umbrella is encouraged. Such subprojects (some ideas are mentioned in the longer-term
roadmap) can start development independently of the overall plan.

### Similar libraries

It helps to analyse what other similar libraries provide:

1. [Libcds](https://github.com/khizmax/libcds) offers a wide array of data
structures and techniques. There are multiple options for similar use cases, e.g.
8 kinds of queues, 6 kinds of maps, and interchangeable RCU-like and hazard pointers
reclamation methods.

2. [Concurrency Kit](https://github.com/concurrencykit/ck) offers epoch-based
reclamation, hazard pointers, queues, hash table, stack, flat-combining and several
other utilities. It has a more focused philosophy.

3. [Folly](https://github.com/facebook/folly) is a large library, but the most
interesting pieces are it's atomic bit set, integer key based hash map, insert-only
general map, and lock-based skiplist.

4. [Boost.Lockfree](https://github.com/boostorg/lockfree) is very basic. It
contains very simple queues and a stack with no advanced memory reclamation.

5. [Intel TBB](https://github.com/wjakob/tbb) has similar goals to Crossbeam
and Rayon combined. Interesting data structures are concurrent vector, queue, and
hash map. They use locking instead of other advanced methods.

6. [Liburcu](https://github.com/urcu/userspace-rcu) has a doubly linked list,
stack, queue, and hash map. Data structures are backed by a RCU mechanism
implemented in userspace. This is very relevant to Crossbeam.

7. [Java.util.concurrent](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/?java/util/concurrent/package-summary.html)
packs a bunch of stuff. The most interesting data structure is probably
`ConcurrentSkipListMap`. This is the best widely available lock-free ordered map
that "just works": it offers all reasonable methods and imposes as few
restrictions as is possible. Memory reclamation is taken care of by Java's GC.

To summarize, lessons that can be learned are:

1. It's easy to fall into the trap of implementing a long laundry list of similar
data structures with slightly different tradeoffs. A good example of the problem
is already in Crossbeam: we have both `MsQueue` and `SegQueue` that look very
similar. Few users can answer the question: "Which one to choose and when?", so
this difficult choice presents a stumbling block. It's okay to provide multiple
options, but only if it's clear which one is the safe default, and which are
alternatives for advanced users. In this regard Crossbeam will strive to be more like
java.util.concurrent rather than libcds.

2. It can be tempting to overoptimize data structures by sacrificing API
flexibility or plain convenience. Crossbeam will first and foremost offer
reasonably performant concurrent data structures that feel easy to use and
have rich, unsurprising APIs. Performance always comes second: if there is a need
for faster alternatives, they can be provided alongside as well.

The overall theme is: easy defaults, fast alternatives.

# Drawbacks and alternatives

Crossbeam attempts to solve hard problems that are under very hot academic
research in a practical way. It is possible to choose wrong tradeoffs for the GC or data
structures. New papers will emerge in time, and new ways of solving problems will
be discovered.

It is possible that parts of the roadmap will have to be revised, or even some of
the data structures completely redesigned and rewritten. Perhaps even Crossbeam's core.
For that reason an effort will be put into approaching the problems carefully and
anticipating better implementations in the future.

An alternative could be to avoid focused holistic approach and simply try building
all data structures that come out of research. Then benchmark them, compare, and
grow the library organically.

# Unresolved questions

How do we finely break the goals into smaller deliverable chunks?

Should we split Crossbeam into multiple crates, and how?
